Add new topic: Reusing devcontainers within pipelines (#964)
microsoft/code-with-engineering-playbook: docs/continuous-integration/devcontainers/README.md

> &#178;: could be mitigated via adding image caching without using a container registry

### Run CI pipelines in the dev container with image registry

| Pros                                                                                               | Cons                                                                                                                                 |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Utilities scripts will work out of the box                                                         | Need to rebuild the container for each run, given that there may be changes within the branch being built                            |
| No surprise for the developers, local outputs (of linting for instance) will be the same in the CI | Not everything in the container is needed for the CI pipeline&#185;                                                                  |

> | Rules used (for linting or unit tests) will be the same on the CI                                  | Some tools were installed via a definition in `devcontainer.json`, resulting in a different container from the dev environment&#178; |

Author: If you're using a devcontainer.json with container features, for example, your development environment can still look different from your pipeline, if you just build the image via docker build.

If it doesn't make sense, do you think you could suggest a reword?

> | Rules used (for linting or unit tests) will be the same on the CI                                  | Some tools were installed via a definition in `devcontainer.json`, resulting in a different container from the dev environment&#178; |

Author: After additional discussions, we've agreed to add an additional sections to list all available ways to build dev containers.

| All tooling and their versions defined in a single place                                           | Some pipeline tasks will not be available &#179;                                                                                     |

> | Tools/dependencies are already present                                                             | Require access to a container registry to host the container within the pipeline&#8308;                                              |

Reviewer: Is it worth noting that GitHub provides GHCR which can be used without setting up a separate registry?

Author: It is a mitigation of having to pass in your own registry credentials in order to use this in a pipeline. With Github Actions you can just use the built in, which is cool if you don't know that you can do that. 

Why do you think it's not worth it?

Reviewer: Sorry, my "is it worth..." comment was really me suggesting it and asking whether you agreed that it would be good to add 😄

Author: I modified the notation on this below to be more detailed :)

| The dev container is being tested to include all new tooling in addition to not being broken       |                                                                                                                                      |

> &#185;: container size can be reduces by exporting the layer that contains only the tooling needed for the CI pipeline. This would require building the image without tasks

> > &#178;: building dev container with [GitHub - devcontainers/ci](https://github.com/devcontainers/ci) builds the container with the `devcontainer.json`. Example here: [devcontainers/ci · Getting Started](https://github.com/devcontainers/ci/blob/main/docs/github-action.md#getting-started)

Reviewer: Also, publishing the container built from `devcontainer.json` allows you to reference it in the `cacheFrom` in `devcontainer.json` (see [docs](https://containers.dev/implementors/json_reference/#image-specific)). By doing this, VS Code will use the published image as a layer cache when building :-)

> &#179;: using container jobs in AzDO you can use all tasks (as far as I can tell). Reference: [Dockerizing DevOps V2 - AzDO container jobs - DEV Community](https://dev.to/eliises/dockerizing-devops-v2-azdo-container-jobs-3hbf)
> &#8308;: within GH actions, the default Github Actions token can be used for accessing the container registry, see the example below

> ```yaml

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning here that this build task doesn't include dev container features specified in `devcontainer.json`?

Reviewer 2: I think that particular build action just builds the container using the Dockerfile, but does not know about the `devcontainer.json` (which is specific to dev containers).... The `devcontainers/ci` action in contrast builds the dev container fully taking `devcontainer.json` into account.

# Reusing dev containers within a pipeline

Given a repository with a local development container aka [dev container](../devcontainers/README.md) that contains all the tooling required for development, would it make sense to reuse that container for running the tooling in the Continuous Integration pipelines?

## Options for building devcontainers within pipeline

There are three ways to build devcontainers within pipeline:

- With [GitHub - devcontainers/ci](https://github.com/devcontainers/ci) builds the container with the `devcontainer.json`. Example here: [devcontainers/ci · Getting Started](https://github.com/devcontainers/ci/blob/main/docs/github-action.md#getting-started).
- With [GitHub - devcontainers/cli](https://github.com/devcontainers/cli), which is the same as the above, but using the underlying CLI directly without tasks.

> - Building the `DockerFile` with `docker build`. This option excludes all configuration/packages specified within the `devcontainer.json`.

Reviewer: nit: I'd use the term features here since that's a term that VS Code is driving (and matches the term in `devcontainer.json`)

```suggestion
- Building the `DockerFile` with `docker build`. This option excludes all configuration/featuresspecified within the `devcontainer.json`.
```

Author: Sure! I'll make a separate commit, because your suggestion is missing a space :)

- Run CI pipelines in the dev container with a container registry

Here are below pros and cons for both approaches:

### Run CI pipelines in native environment

| Pros                                                  | Cons                                                                                                                                         |
| ----------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Can use any pipeline tasks available                  | Need to keep two sets of tooling and their versions in sync                                                                                  |
| No container registry                                 | Can take some time to start, based on tools/dependencies required                                                                            |
| Agent will always be up to date with security patches | The dev container should always be built within each run of the CI pipeline, to verify the changes within the branch haven't broken anything |

> ### Run CI pipelines in the dev container with building image locally

Reviewer: After our discussion earlier, it is worth tweaking this title for clarity?

```suggestion
### Run CI pipelines in the dev container without image caching
```
